<img src="/images/blog/voskresensky-concert-still.jpg" alt="Mikhail Voskresenky Recital" width="100%" />

# Voskresensky - A Glimpse Into the Golden Age of Piano

<p style="text-align:center">by Aleksey Nikolsky on March 18, 2024</p>

## Foreword

"Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast" was a theme which ran
through the recital of the maverick pianist, Mikhail Voskresensky. The
program included compositions by Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Scriabin, and
Prokofiev -- followed by 2 encores by Gluck/Sgambatti and Chopin -- all
presenting an Apollonian outlook on the calamities that shook the
"Russian World" and undermined the very foundation of a long-lived
tradition of Russian pianism - one of the brightest representatives of
which is Mikhail Voskresensky.

Mentored by the legendary pianist, Lev Oborin, the winner of the 1st
Chopin competition and a lifelong partner of David Oistrakh, Mikhail
Voskresensky, carries the torch of the legacy of Igumnov's piano school.
Unfortunately, not as well-known outside of Russia as Neuhaus' school,
Igumnov's approach to pianism has earned respect for its focus on
coloristic illumination of each music composition by means of the
interplay between phrasing, voicing, rubato, and pedaling. Unlike
Heinrich Neuhaus, Konstantin Igumnov did not leave a book on the
philosophy of piano playing. So, the only way for us to appreciate his
approach is through the bearers of the tradition of his school.

Connecting the glorious past with the depressing present was exactly the
centerpiece of Voskresensky's program which reflected a great internal
struggle that he had to endure due to the ongoing detrimental political
changes in Russia. At the age of 87, Mikhail Voskresensky had to leave
behind not only his motherland, but his dear alma mater, the Moscow
Tchaikovsky Conservatory, whose piano department he headed and through
which he nurtured hundreds of young pianists. His ethical principles
simply did not allow him to play along with the political landscape that
has gradually disintegrated the esteemed heritage of Tolstoy, Chekhov,
Repin, and Tchaikovsky, setting the present-day Russians on the path to
a fraternal war against Ukraine, a sort of revanchist imperialism, and
the breakup with the West in favor of socio-political alliance with
Communist China. This course of affairs is especially conflicting with
the historic legacy of Moscow Conservatory. From its earliest days,
through the creative output of Piotr Tchaikovsky and his followers,
Moscow Conservatory has been counterbalancing the influence of the
pan-Slavically oriented Saint-Petersburg's "Mighty Six" by propagating
pan-European styles and genres of music.

Concerns for the European identity, values of the Enlightenment, and
conventions of the Common Era Period - so well conserved behind the Iron
Curtain in the former Soviet Union - underlaid the recital program of
Mikhail Voskresensky. It sent a powerful message that life is still
beautiful and will prevail over the atrocities of war and the sad
collapse of the classic Russian humanistic tradition.

## Program

One of **Haydn**'s very few piano compositions in the minor key,
***Sonata E Minor*** opened the concert. From the very first movement,
Mikhail Voskresensky immediately showed how special his treatment of the
classic Viennese sonata form was. He brought out the contrasting
alternations between the heavily trotting double-notes of the
monothematic principal and alternative subjects, on the one hand, and
the beautifully flowing 16th-notes of the connective and conclusive
subjects, on the other hand.

The rushing Presto of the first movement was suddenly offset by the
G-major serenity of the Adagio monologue in a "florid" style, championed
after Haydn's death by Beethoven and Hummel. Voskresensky's hands made
all the flourishes and embellishments shine with delicate legato,
staccato, and portato articulations. The ending of the slow movement was
beautifully shaded by a Baroque-like modulation to minor, reminiscent of
C.P.E. Bach.

One of the most melodious amongst Haydn's works, the Finale put a
bitter-sweet end to the entire Sonata. Unlike many pianists who try to
show the fragility and sophisticated grace of its melody, Voskresensky
chose to highlight the "innocemente" marking in the score. He simplified
the phrasing of the theme and pushed the Finale's Molto Vivace to run
closer to the Presto of the 1st movement. This bridged the fast
movements and lightened the darker sections in the minor key, leaving a
more optimistic impression of the entire sonata.

Next in line was the tricky ***Rondo A minor*** by **Mozart**. Marked by
the composer as "Andante", it necessitates the pianist to make the
accompaniment as though "stroll" (from Italian "andare" - to walk)
throughout the music. This is easier said than done, since in this
composition, dramatic episodes and generous virtuosic melodic
embellishments tend to prompt the performer to slow down in order to
expose the expressive details. Quite to the contrary, the genre of rondo
calls for a display of ease and excitement of motion along with
enjoyment of the catchy tune of the refrain. A rondo in Andante suggests
an exciting "excursion" across all episodes and returns of the refrain -
which many pianists fail to attain, confused by the density of thematic
elaboration and chromatic intricacies of melody and harmony, quite
unusual for Classicism. Focusing on such details and over-dramatizing
chromatic incursions can drag the tempo and destroy the metric
uniformity of the Andante. Voskresensky, however, was able to
beautifully escape this Scilla and Charybdis and guide the listeners
through all the diversities of the Rondo without compromising the grace
of its Andante gait. Especially admirable was Voskresensky's pedaling,
which breathed soul into every section of the music while not getting in
the way of the crispness of the occasional staccato and portato
articulations.

The next showstopper was the evergreen, albeit overplayed "***Moonlight"
Sonata*** by **Beethoven**. Most pianists present its famous 1st
movement as a funeral recitative (Edwin Fischer justified this
interpretation by tracing Beethoven's sketches of it to the tenebrose
trio of the basses after the Commendatore's murder from Mozart's "Don
Giovanni). But not Mikhail Voskresensky! Under his miraculous fingers,
Beethoven's Adagio Sostenuto magically turned into an impressionistic
painting that captured the mystery and poetry of a beautiful yet
illusive dreamy night. Voskresensky soothed the bass line, evened out
the triplet figurations, and obscured the lonely melody, suspending it
in the air and shading it with lush pedal - all to generate the most
enigmatic ghostly chiaroscuro effect.

This unusual image was replaced by yet another impressionistic
revelation -- the Allegretto minuet of the 2nd movement. Unlike the
majority of pianists, Voskresensky chose to render it not as a dance but
rather as an "impression" of a dance -- as though one was fondly
recalling the joys of the past day's activities. This unusual rendition
was achieved by the masterful blending of voicing, phrasing, and
pedaling.

The tumultuous Finale further energized the entire sonata cycle --
unlike the conventional "fast-slow-fast\" 3-movement arrangement,
Beethoven made the movements progressively increase in pace
(Adagio-Allegretto-Presto), intensity, and complexity. Voskresensky
further stressed the dramatism of this cycle by making the movements
follow each other without a break in-between. However, he did not
dramatize the principal subject of the finale with a crescendo (as many
pianists do). Instead, he evened out its broken arpeggios (emphasizing
their similarity to the triplets of the 1st movement) and stressed the
thunder-like sforzando of the staccato chords at the end of each
ascending arpeggio wave. He also lyricized the alternative subject by
desynchronizing it in relation to the accompaniment with the help of a
carefully weighed rubato. Such asynchrony is exceedingly difficult to
achieve in "Presto Agitato" tempo and can be found in very few
recordings of the Golden Age of piano (most notably, by Ignaz Friedman).
By colliding the tempestuous principal part, lyrical alternative part,
and the "danse macabre" of the massive staccato chords of the conclusive
part, Voskresensky unveiled the tragedy of the Finale, breaking away
from the impressionistic charm of the previous two movements.

**Scriabin**'s ***Prelude and Nocturne*** for the left hand **Op.9**
interrupted the series of compositions in the minor key by suddenly
opening a hedonistic window. The melancholic Chopinesque Prelude in C
sharp Minor reached a placid Pycardy cadence in C sharp Major at its
ending, and Nocturne carried on its cloudless mood in a firm D flat
Major. Scriabin wrote his opus 9 after injuring his right hand, so that
his left hand would do the job of both hands. To add to this technical
difficulty, Prelude and Nocturne each feature a dialog texture, calling
for a polyphonic differentiation of parts. And still another pianistic
challenge here is that both movements engage the same tempo of "Andante"
but in relation to different time signatures: 3/4 for Prelude versus 6/8
for Nocturne. Pretty straightforward for 3/4, the stepping gait that
characterizes Andante is by far trickier to generate in 6/8. Proper
rendition of Nocturne requires consistent stressing of the beat in all
16th-note legato figurations of the accompaniment. Many pianists
become confused by the legato slurs in the score and smoothen the flow
of the accompaniment, in effect, turning the stepping "Andante" into a
stretched out "Adagio".

Voskresensky's rendition avoided this pitfall and exhibited an
enchanting transformation of the pensive melancholic steps of Prelude's
3/4 into the sliding steps of Nocturne's 6/8. In his performance, both
movements also shared the same texture of dialog between a declamatory
tenor and a tranquilizing bass - but implemented differently. In
Prelude, he conjoined their responses by making them share the same
ongoing accompaniment of repeated 8th double-notes. In Nocturne, he
segregated the conversing parts by supporting each with its own
accompaniment pattern: longer and relaxed waves for the treble melody
versus shorter sighing figurations for the bass melody.

Mikhail Voskresensky masterfully dressed up each melody in a differently
colored "garment" with the power of his touché and pedal. A small middle
section brought in a short-lived dark cloud of a contrasting motif-work
made of ascending pairs of 16th-notes -- all to dissolve into the
heavenly delicate cadenza that like a rainbow faded away in the clouds,
terminating the cycle with an elated hymn to nature, so typical for
Russian Romantic and post-Romantic music.

And finally, **Prokofiev**'s ***Sonata No. 8*** crowned the recital
program with its deep philosophical contemplation of life and death. It
took 5 years (from 1939 to 1944) for Prokofiev to complete this most
monumental of his piano sonatas which stands on par with his symphonies
in terms of complexity of content and form. Composed in parallel with
his opera "War and Peace," Sonata No.8 was written for Emil Gilels,
favored by Prokofiev for his lyrical charm and uncanny ability to
present complex matters so naturally with unbelievable clarity and ease.
The same approach characterized Voskresensky's performance.

He opened the sonata with a sweet unconventional "Andante dolce" based
on the theme resembling the love leitmotif of Prokofiev's ballet "Romeo
and Juliet" in its exuberant wide leaps and intertwining supplementary
voices. Through his expertly blending of diverse touché and pedaling,
Voskresensky managed to shade each of the 5 introspective and intimate
lyrical themes of the 1st movement with its own unique coloration,
ranging from meditative to mysterious. In the hands of maestro
Voskresensky, the dramatic invasion in the Allegro moderato of the
development section became shattered into a kaleidoscope of bright
changes built around the anxious run of the 16th-notes and the dark
chromatic harmonies. Lyrical themes of the exposition acquired a
grotesque and ominous character, forming one wave of growing tension and
massiveness after another. But gradually, this "War"-centered
culmination of doom, anger, and anguish ran out of energy, leading to an
abbreviated and gloomy recapitulation, which was once again interrupted
by the return of the turbulent and wicked Allegro. The continuous rush
of the 16th-notes was suddenly cut off by dissonant passages,
terminating the movement with shimmering chromatic suspensions and the
lonely timid B flat major chord.

The 2nd movement started with an unexpectedly humorous neoclassicist
minuet in the same spirit as Prokofiev's venerated 1st symphony.
However, its tempo, "Andante sognando," hinted at the illusive nature of
this sudden enlightenment. Mikhail Voskresensky inventively unveiled the
fantastic nature of this gentle ceremonial dance movement by stealthily
obscuring its steps and focusing on melodic voicing. It took a while
before the audience could realize that the minuet was over - having
eluded like a captivating but short-lived dream. As the movement went
on, the Andante became gradually dissolved into a stream of flexible
melodic figurations, a nexus of polyphonic voices and saturated
"Fauvist" harmonic transitions. The movement lost its momentum and
fizzled out like a shattered recollection -- too vague to be held in
memory.

The Vivace brought in a jolly and energetic Finale in the sonata rondo
form and toccata style, so typical for Prokofiev. However, unlike the
majority of pianists, Voskresensky chose to de-emphasize the
toccata-like prevailing non-legato and staccato by resorting to his
amazing pedal technique. He somehow managed to smudge the beats of the
fast 12/8 movement into a hazy sfumato. This, along with the integrative
phrasing and voicing which fused the plentitude of brief disjointed
motifs spread all over the texture, allowed Voskresensky to perform a
magic trick and facelift the rudimentary toccata, transfiguring its
choppy *jeu perlé* passages into a web of graceful melodic lines. As a
result, the Finale obtained a peculiar lyrical quality, further
lightened by consistent leaning on the longer hyper-metric pulses (every
other bar) rather than the beats or the downbeats of the alternating
sections in 12/8 and 3/4. Even a more melodious and lyrical turnaround
occurred in the Pochissimo meno mosso, when Voskresensky suddenly
revived the melancholically shimmering alternative subject from the 1st
movement. But in contrast to its originally vulnerable and fragile
character, he framed its return in the Finale as a deep cathartic
transformation. Reproduced for 4 times, this theme became progressively
more and more vital, as though finally coming back to life. This
resurrection led to a joyous eruption in the coda, where all the main
themes of the previous movements merge into the triumphal climax --
marking the victory of Peace over War in Voskresensky's concert program.

## Encores

In response to a long and resounding standing ovation, Mikhail
Voskresensky gifted the audience with his performance of Wilhelm Kempff's arrangement of **Gluck**'s
famous "***Melodie***." This renowned gem of
a cathartic musical beauty comes from Gluck's opera "Orfeo ed Euridice"
as one of the dances of the Blessed Spirits in the Elysium -- a most
appropriate encore for Voskresensky's program. In his rendition, this
serene melody soared over the technically tricky quavering of the
non-stop 16th notes of the accompaniment. Kempff’s arrangement differs from the more popular
version by Sgambati by breaking up the continuous double notes of the accompaniment into a steady
2-note figuration played in each hand (as opposed to shifting the double-notes from one hand to
another). So, the technical challenge here is in the almost permanent stretch of each palm where
the resulting tension does not obstruct the “talk-like” impression of the melodic phrases. Despite
their extreme stretch, Voskresensky's
fingers made all 16th-notes form a free-floating backdrop, complementing
the solitary unveiling of the elated cantilena of the melody in the
foreground. His skillful pedaling filled the air with an otherworldly
aura, turning Gluck's simple harmonies into mystifying sonorities.

The second encore, the evergreen ***Fantaisie-Impromptu*** in C sharp
minor by **Chopin**, simply sparkled under Voskresensky's fingers. Like
a living organism, the melody gently waived with its own little rubato,
quite autonomous from the accompaniment, slightly accelerating and
decelerating at the inhaling and exhaling turns of the melodic phrases,
occasionally opening up with expanded melodic fiorituras. Quite unusual
was the treatment of the middle section. In contrast to the elongated
legato of the opening Allegro Agitato, Voskresensky turned the middle
Moderato Cantabile into an expressive recitative with refined and
meticulous phrasing. The clear and definite motifs of the speaking
cantilena were landing on the murmuring waves of the accompaniment akin
to the brushstrokes in a colorful plein-air Impressionistic landscape
painting. Especially poetic was the coda with the Moderato melody in the
bass crowned by a nimbus-like sfumato figuration of the right hand. Such
an iconic ending underlined the triumph of Peace over War in the recital
program.

## Conclusion

The entire recital was a convincing demonstration of the advantages of a
traditional manner of interpreting classical compositions - as inherited
from the "Golden Era" of pianism. Abandoned and discredited by the
avant-garde pianists of the late 20th century (such as Glenn Gould), who
followed the avant-garde composers on the path towards attaining
originality at the expense of sacrificing poignant and meaningful
conventional means of expression. It is the traditional approach to
interpretation that makes music more accessible to a wider public, while
rewarding the connoisseurs with deeper and fuller understanding of
familiar (or unfamiliar) compositions. But in order to gain this
harvest, a pianist has to work hard to seed the plants for an impressive
presentation of the music.

On top of obtaining full command of pianistic technique, a pianist has
to be able to grasp and analyze any music score, identify the most
important patterns of expression for each of the expressive aspects of
music (melody, harmony, rhythm, meter, tempo, texture, dynamics,
articulation, and music form), and convert such patterns into suitable
pianistic motions. These motions are then to be configured and
integrated to project the psycho-emotional plot of the composition, the
presentation of which needs a rhetoric optimization in the manner of an
orator's speech directed at the audience to stir it in a specific way.

Through his extraordinary and unforgettable performance, Mikhail
Voskresensky reminded us of how a powerful and memorable recital can
leave one with a lasting impression, when every music piece in the
program is thoroughly conceived, understood, internalized, and
effectively communicated to the audience. Voskresensky's mastery was in
connecting the dots between the music structures found in the score, the
appropriate pianistic motions, the repertory of expressive means
(rubato, dynamic shaping, articulation, and pedaling), and the artistic
erudition - the knowledge of individual styles of the composers and
circumstances of the creation of their compositions -- all of it
together, is what made the music he performed resonate so deeply with
his audience.

Listeners felt enriched and enlightened by having lived through a unique
and deepening psycho-emotional experience during his concert. Such an
experience can be transformative - making one think over the heard music
and enjoy a new understanding of it and of oneself. This is what
classical music used to be about and is still capable of producing in
performers and listeners of our time - as encountered in Mikhail
Voskrenesky's performance.

And here I would like to extend my warmest thanks to Temirzhan
Yerzhanov and Klara Frei of "Gradus ad Parnassum" for having organized
such a truly unforgettable event - one which provided an opportunity for
us who attended it to get a taste of what the Golden Age of Russian
Pianism was all about - a memory to be cherished. As long as there are pianists
and teachers like Temirzhan, himself a student of Mikhail Voskresensky, and
his lovely wife, Klara, there is hope of keeping this torch to continue
to burn bright.

<img src="/images/blog/voskresensky-concert-masterclass-promo.jpg" alt="Mikhail Voskresenky Recital" width="50%" style="display: block; margin: 1.5rem auto 0;" />
