<img src="/images/blog/american-string-quartet-with-nel.jpg" alt="American String Quartet with Anton Nel Recital" width="100%" />

# From Humor to Tragedy - A Concert Review

<p style="text-align:center">by Aleksey Nikolsky on June 12, 2024</p>

From humor to tragedy - was the theme that ran through the entire
recital program of the American String Quartet with Anton Nel, on
Sunday, June 9th as part of the 2024 Austin Chamber Music Festival at UT
Austin.

One of the world's finest quartets, the 48-year-old American String
Quartet has been an integral part of the Aspen Music Festival since
1974, adorning it with the hedonistic spirit of the good old
*Hausmusik*. Quartet performance has been part of this wonderful
tradition for over two centuries. Amateurs and professionals alike have
been celebrating the expressive power of music at intimate house
gatherings for the mutual enjoyment of performers and listeners. The
very genre of string quartet, faceted by Haydn in the mid-18th century,
is an epitome of creative collaboration between 4 equal and devoted
music lovers who put their performance skills at work to collectively
explore interesting compositions before friends in a cozy salon setting.
Thousands of quartets created for this purpose by generations of
composers provide a wealth of musical stories to be told and given
expression to for everyone's delight.

This concert program featured 3 such compositions - two string quartets
and a piano quintet - each with a very different story that came to show
how comedy and tragedy are often just a step apart. As the saying goes:
"What is a comedy for those who think is often a tragedy for those who
feel."

## Beethoven - G Major Quartet, Op. 18, No. 2

The program started with Beethoven's G Major Quartet op.18 No.2,
composed in 1799 for Prince Lobkowitz of Bohemia - just a few years
after Beethoven stopped taking lessons from Haydn. Not surprisingly,
Beethoven's quartet owes much to "papa" Haydn who actually made the
genre of string quartet so popular amongst high society. Following
Haydn's recipe, Beethoven too created this quartet for enlightenment as
well as entertainment: to lift up the spirit with harmonious positive
ideals while exercising the mind with a succession of witty characters.
The very opening of the quartet sets a humorous mode - the flowery
embellishing passage after the first note of the theme has even earned
the quartet the nickname, "*Komplimentier-Quartett*" (literally,
"quartet of bows and curtseys").

The performers beautifully illuminated the ironic gallant style. They
resorted to much more generous use of legato than most string players do
in Beethoven. Longer bowing, pronounced in the first two movements,
smoothened the phrases and made their structure easier to follow without
sacrificing the integrity of the motifs. This made it easy to hear where
a phrase set out to reach the climax point and where it began to expire,
moving towards the terminating cadence. More obvious phrasing, in turn,
enabled each of the players to make their parts as though talk to each
other by bringing out their polyphonic differences. Especially handy was
the emphasis placed on the 1st violin and cello - the instruments that
mark the frame of the music texture by defining its highest and lowest
margins. The cellist, Wolfram Koessel, most appropriately responded to
the smallest nuances in Peter Winograd's (first violinist's) phrasing.
Together, they set the "skeleton" for the entire composition, while
Laurie Carney (2nd violinist) and Daniel Avshalomov (violist) filled its
"flesh". The result was as vivid as Michelangelo's frescoes.

Beethoven's music broke into a series of highly animated and often
surprising episodes. Already the 1st movement contained a powerful yet
preemptive false recapitulation in Eb Major (after just about a dozen
bars of development in a minor key), then revealing this deception by
conspiring to a stealthy pianissimo on a sharply punctured rhythm. The
sporadic development took a long turnabout, throwing off the actual
genuine recapitulation section. Contrary to the rules of the sonata
form, it deviated quite far from the tonic G Major - reaching E Major,
this time on a humorous "hush-hush" pianissimo.

This jocular mode did not end with the 1st movement. A very "proper"
serious *Adagio cantabile* immediately revealed the quip - each of the
opening phrases contained just 3 bars instead of the regular squared 2-,
4- and 8-bar structures. This limping "3-legged" gait contradicted the
majestic pace and graceful elongated legato. Nonetheless, the performers
convincingly acted out their deliberately serious humoristic lines:
lavishly eloquent embellishments of the 1st violin or the sudden
over-excited falsetto of the cello. Even more sudden was the puzzling
pianissimo eruption of the *Allegro* episode that was based on the brief
staccato figuration. Equally puzzling was the return to the eccentric
"*Adagio*" that was no "cantabile" any more - now filled up with
embellishing fioriture in each of the parts.

This bizarre pompous *Adagio* in a trice exploded into a hyperactive
scherzo, shattered by a cascade of disjointed and jolty 3-4-note
staccato motifs. Occasional strong waves of collective crescendos and
diminuendos on regular staccato 8th-notes resembled the comic operas of
Rossini. And the trio of the scherzo followed the same surrealistic
style - instead of offsetting the lively *Allegro* with a conventional
pastoral and relaxed section, it broke into a caricaturish minuet
peppered with long Forte-piano notes and upbeat trills.

The "*Allegro Molto quasi Presto*" finale carried on and culminated the
hyperactive mode of the scherzo, engaging the arsenal of humoristic
devices, invented by Haydn in his finales and so favored by young
Beethoven. The firework of staccato chords and leaps, swift passages,
unexpected sforzandos, abrupt modulations, including invasions of minor
keys and multiple false recapitulations - all sparkled and shined under
the bows of the American String Quartet who handled all the challenges
in this rather eccentric composition with utmost elegance, without
losing its Classicist charm.

## Shostakovich - String Quartet No. 13 in Bb minor

And what a divergence of emotional expression followed this witty gem by
Beethoven! The 13th quartet in Bb minor by Shostakovich is one of the
gloomiest compositions in the entire string quartet literature. Its
story needs a little explanation.

Shostakovich viewed the profession of a composer through an idealistic
prism, in line with the aesthetic philosophy of Johann Gottfried Herder
that was very influential amongst many Romantic artists. Despite his
attraction to avant-garde music during his youth, Shostakovich remained
faithful to the Romantic ideals and viewed his mission in life to use
music as a social mirror for society to critically look at itself and
reconcile contradictions between the collective and the personal. Like
novels by Leo Tolstoy, Shostakovich's 15 symphonies paint a monumental
panoramic view of Russian history from Imperial times to Bolshevism,
WWII, and the Cold War. Less known, yet equally representational, are
his 15 string quartets. Unlike his symphonies, they adopt not Tolstoy's
but Dotoyevsky's approach - focusing on a deeply personal and
internalized experience of reality. And the 13th String Quartet reflects
on the end of Khrushchev's "Thaw" and the revival of Communist
authoritarianism.

After Stalin's death in 1953, Khrushchev initiated liberalization that
nourished hopes for greater political and artistic freedoms and cultural
exchange and peaceful competition with the West rather than an
existential war with it. But the removal of Khrushchev after the Cuban
crisis and the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 crossed these hopes.
Shostakovich feared the worst - the return to the Stalinist "Red
Terror," a new round of repressions inside the country and militant
hostilities outside, on the international stage. Hence, he resumed his
old Aesopian approach that he was forced to adopt during the 1930s and
40s to avoid prosecution - to speak the bitter truth akin to Bible
prophets but obscuring this truth with figures of metaphorical speech.
Quartet No. 13 is filled up with such cryptic content.

It uses the 12-tone "dodecaphonic" technique with an extra "false" 13th
tone, passing through the dodecaphonic series 13 times over. There is
more in this symbolism than mere rubbing in the "bad luck" number (or,
perhaps, the implied association with the 13th Apostle, Judas, who
betrayed Jesus). Atonal 12-tone techniques were invented by a number of
radical composers in the beginning of the 20th century and adopted by
many mainstream composers as manifestation of the growing social
tensions, conflicts, and suffering across the world that led to the
outbreak of WWI. Using concordant harmony and stability of the tonic in
conventional Western tonality was viewed by them as defying reality and
deceiving the audiences with pleasant lies. Young Shostakovich shared
this view. Already in his graduation work at St. Petersburg
conservatory, in his 1st symphony, he employed the 12-tone series as its
principal subject. But as Stalin, in the late 1920s, decided to break
ties with the revolutionary activism in the arts and establish the
historic affinity with the conservative cultural achievements of
Imperial Russia, his watchdogs became punitive towards avant-garde
artists. They forced all artists to join the professional unions and
gave jobs only to those who glorified the happiness of the Soviet people
in a simple and conventional language. Shostakovich was no exception. He
was fiercely criticized and threatened with prosecution for using
dissonant harmonies and unpleasant melodies - accused of spreading
Western propaganda and coming dangerously close to being declared the
"enemy of Soviet peoples".

Shostakovich himself publicly and privately denounced atonal techniques,
including dodecaphony, for being dogmatic and stifling the composer's
creativity by abandoning conventions of tonality - not to speak of
obstructing musical communication with the audiences with a musical
language no one understood. Certainly, these denouncing statements were
intended to please the Party's functionaries. But there was much truth
in them - after all, some of his articles on composition were published
during Khrushchev's "Thaw", when many previously forbidden things became
allowed. Shostakovich sincerely believed that strict implementation of
atonal techniques robbed music off of its suggestive power. My mentor
and later, dear friend, Edison Denisov, was Shostakovich's protege and
at some point lived with him at his dacha for an entire summer. As a
pioneer of total serialism in Russia, Denisov had multiple discussions
with Shostakovich on the subject of atonalism. Shostakovich used
dodecaphony as expressive means in an Aesopan sense - to represent
social disharmony and anti-humanist dogmatism. Once the Communist
watchdogs stopped prosecuting composers for writing dissonant music,
Shostakovich started rejecting the directives of the Party's supervisors
to create happy music with beautiful melodies - even at the cost of
suppressing his own natural melodic gift. However, he framed discordant
melodies and harmonies in conventional tonality - following the path of
Alban Berg - to attain strong emotionalism and dramatic contrasts that
were unavailable to strict serialist composers. The systemic use of the
13th tone as a "false tone" that disrupts the mathematical accuracy of
dodecaphonic series pursued the same symbolic purpose - to reflect the
split in the very foundation of the Communist authoritarian order
imposed on the Soviet people.

The entire quartet is terminated by such a "false tone", presented as a
sort of a "leading tone" that seeks resolution but finds none. The
dodecaphonic series is introduced in the viola monolog that opens the
quartet. The viola timbre serves as yet another symbol - of a darkened
human soul, a sort of a "dark violin." The entire quartet was dedicated
to the legendary violist and a close friend, Vadim Borisovsky, the
founding member of the Beethoven Quartet that premiered many of
Shostakovich's quartets (Borisovsky retired before Shostakovich
completed this quartet). He, like Shostakovich, was a peer of the Soviet
regime - enthusiastically embracing the 1917 Revolution and passing
through all the calamities until Brezhnev's Stagnation Era and rotting
of the Soviet ideology. Viola's lonely and disengaged "suffering" solo
opens and closes the quartet like Moses preaching alone, enclosing the
sarcastic middle sections that deliberately feature a primitive, rigid
and tense thematic material. The most memorable of them is the grotesque
jazz-like "walking bass" ostinato episode - a "jam session from hell",
as Eugine Drucker, the violinist of the Emerson String Quartet put it.

The American String Quartet was able to magnify all the cryptic messages
in Shostakovich's score - generating a most eerie and chilling
impression. Its violist, Daniel Avshalomov, who is going to retire at
the end of this season and as such associates himself with Borisovsky,
took the creative initiative to delegate the famous "*col legno
battuto*" - knocking with the reverse wooden side of the bow against the
soundboard - to a dedicated percussionist playing behind the stage,
reminiscent of the use of a trumpet behind the stage in symphonic works
to signify destiny or calling for action. This inventive decision turned
out to perfectly satisfy both the reluctance of string players to damage
their expensive instruments by knocking on them and the expression of
the music. Loud pitchless rhythms suddenly coming from nowhere to
influence the melodic parts came to symbolize the orders of the Party
officials to the Soviet artists and audiences to feel in a "correct"
way - in accordance with the Party's cultural doctrine and against their
natural emotional impulses. Daniel had thoughtfully selected a Cuban
cigar box to generate the most sonorous timbre, and Anton Nel found an
opportunity to display his talent as a percussionist by playing this
"unmusical" instrument!

It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that the performance really
shocked the audience who took a while to make sense of the suspended
eerie ending before erupting into an applaud. Mixed feelings have been
the signature of every expressive performance of this highly unusual
quartet since its premiere in Leningrad, 1970, where the audience
perfectly well understood the cryptic message of the music and gave it a
standing ovation until the whole thing was played all over again - to
think over the deep issues uncovered by music. Shostakovich himself was
caught between Scilla and Charybdis in his estimates of this
controversial composition. To his censorious colleagues at the
Composer's Union he downplayed his creation: "​​I wrote a short lyrical
quartet with a jocular middle;" but to the Beethoven Quartet during
rehearsals he referred to *col legno* as "the lash of a whip in a
concentration camp." And here, I must admit that the American String
Quartet chose the right time to perform this quartet in light of the
ongoing Russia's aggression toward Ukraine that manifests the new
commitment of a Russian state to revive the despotic Stalinist
oppression.

## Robert Schumann - Quintet, Op. 44

The hopelessly tragic story of Shostakovich's quartet was offset by an
optimistic and brilliant masterpiece by Schumann - his Piano Quintet,
Op. 44. In this program, the quintet acted as a golden mean, bridging
the humorous Beethoven and the black-humored Shostakovich. Many
musicians consider this quintet a happy wedding gift by Schumann to his
wife, Clara Wieck. But in reality this composition reflects Schumann's
struggle to retain his sanity. He wrote it in October of 1842, in less
than a month, 2 years after his marriage, in an attempt to provide Clara
with a few powerful original pieces to secure her performance career as
a pianist in Europe. He had not authored any chamber music before 1842
(except his teenage exploration of a piano quartet), only to suddenly
burst with 5 masterpieces - 3 string quartets, a piano quintet, and a
piano quartet - all completed within a few months, in an incredible bout
of inspiration. But this came at a cost. The same year also marked
Schumann's first major mental crisis. While accompanying Clara on her
tour, in February and March, he succumbed to an attack of manic
depression, so strong that for several days he could not go outdoors.
After returning home and starting to sketch his quintet, he suffered yet
another fit of depression and insomnia. The music reflected Schumann's
effort to find balance in his bipolar disorder.

The heroic opening of the quintet bubbles with energy. The wide sweeping
theme passes through a series of emotional transformations, ranging from
bold challenge to gentle consolation. The performers exquisitely
amplified the bipolarity and emotional instability of the music by
turning it into a fight between the two personalities of Schumann,
nicknamed by him as "Florestan" (the fiery) and "Eusebius" (the droopy).
Some archive recordings, such as the 1924 session by Ossip Gabrilowitsch
and the Flonzaley Quartet, had explored this "schizophrenic" approach.
But Anton Nel and the American String Quartet took it one step further:
they delegated the controversial roles to the instruments, where the
piano was subtly pulling the music back, while the string instruments
were pushing it forward. This strange conflicting rubato kicked in the
principal subject and went on for most of the music. The alternative
subject also combined the lyrical dialog of the cello and the viola with
the anxious pulse of the piano figurations. The entire movement went on
alternating between polar impulses, without a moment of repose. Much of
this unorthodox rubato treatment should be credited to Anton Nel, who
played his part from memory and was constantly watching the
articulations of the string players - like legendary accompaniment by
Harold Bauer to such Romantically free violinists as Efrem Zimbalist or
Albert Spalding.

The 2nd movement suddenly moved the action to an entirely different
stage - like a contrasting act in an opera. Echoing the famous funeral
march from Beethoven's Heroic Symphony, it "tightly enclosed the darkest
tragedy" (using Tchaikovsky's characterization) in the rigid and laconic
formula of the principal theme. Its ostinato rhythm with regular pauses
was as though caught into a trance like morbid sleep-walking. The only
sharp retort came when the accompaniment hit a dissonant B natural,
forming a harsh minor 2nd in relation to the melodic ostinato of "C".
This enchanted funeral procession in an instance turned into a rosy
dream in the C Major episode. Its wavy quarter-note triplets and slow
smooth melody contradicted the very framework of the march. Even more
contradicting was the central *Agitato* episode in a tumultuous F minor.
The boiling energy of its staccato 8th-note triplets, heated up by
frequent sforzandos, suited more a dramatic Sonata Allegro than the trio
of the funeral march - of course, unless this march was written by
Schumann!

The ascending scale passages of the Eb major scherzo brought back the
heroic character of the 1st movement. But the descending steps of the
accentuated mordents of the 1st violin quivered nervously, as though
distrusting the positive message. Two trios further disrupted the
momentum. The first aimlessly skimmed over the spinning background with
the ditty made of a chain of empty-sounding 5ths. The second trio
suddenly deviated to minor while featuring a twirling perpetual motion,
quite playful and even gracious. The kaleidoscope of unpredictable
changes of the 2nd and 3rd movements finally found resolution in a
simple folk-like dancing refrain of the positively charged finale. Its
energy pretty much directed the flow of the music away from the
conflicting fluctuations and towards a festive celebratory mood.
Schumann still threw in the reminiscences of the previous themes while
retaining the heroic character. The entire development was crowned by a
most skillful fugue in the coda, bringing to mind Mozart's glorious
fugue from the finale of his "Jupiter" symphony. Schumann too succeeded
in implementing all the polyphonic rules without impeding the excited
run towards the triumphal ending. Its energy made the audience jump out
of their seats with a most genuine and inspired standing ovation.

## Johannes Brahms - Piano Quintet, Op. 34, 2nd Movement

However, the performers chose to close their recital with an encore on a
dear and quiet note - with the gracefully lulling 2nd movement of
Brahms' Piano Quintet, op. 34. They interpreted "*Andante un poco
adagio*" as an idyllic dream, resting the entire movement on a
delightful gentle rocking of a masterfully carried out rubato rhythm of
the accompaniment. Like in many famous Lieder by Schubert, this
accompaniment alone comfortably carried the entire composition. Thus,
the entire recital received its happy ending that offset the
perturbations of Shostakovich and Schumann and sent the audience home
with the warmest of memories.

Here, we should thank not only the American String Quartet and Anton Nel
for this treasure but also Michelle Schumann - the artistic director of
ACMC who programmed and put together the whole festival, including this
remarkable concert.
